Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I have a return guest for you, Doctor
Daniel Hoyer. He's senior research associate and managing director
for CCAT, Global History Data Bank, research scientist with
the Social AI Research Group and founder of Soda.
Last time we talked about his great book figuring
out the past. I'm leaving a link to it
in the description down below. And today we're talking
about cliodynamics or the use of maths and data
to study history instead of some other more traditional
approaches. So, Doctor Hoyer, welcome back to the show.
It's always a pleasure to
everyone. Yeah, thank you so much for having me,
Ricardo.
So, I mean, let's start perhaps with the most
basic question here. So, what is cliodynamics?
Cliodynamics, it is an interesting kind of new field.
Really, all it means is bringing a sort of
scientific method to studying the past. And so it
stands for Cleo is sort of the old Greek
use of history, which is what it's named after.
And dynamics is really just a study of how
and why things change over time. And so it's
trying to bring the kind of formalism, the um
You know, theory testing hypothesis testing from science into
understanding um the way that historical societies have changed
over time.
And how does it compare to other more traditional
approaches in the history?
It's a really interesting question. I, I, I think,
you know, it's a little more um in line
with the traditional approaches than it seems at first.
I think it can accommodate many different uh methods
and tools. I'd say the main difference, as I
say, is, is really trying to bring that formalism,
that language of science of quantitative reasoning. So bringing
in statistics, bringing in math, bringing in sort of
modeling, um, trying to make your, your assumptions uh
Explicit, trying to be formal about, OK, here's an
hypothesis, here's how I'm going to test it. Here's
a sort of causal mechanism that we can explore.
Let's see if it holds up in, in multiple
different contexts. And again, that's kind of the scientific
approach, but if it's very comfortably with as well,
the qualitative, um, you know, detailed context finding of
traditional history. So I think it's actually, you know,
pretty in line with some of the traditional methods
is just adding a new layer to it.
OK, but what kinds of sources can you resort
to and what kinds of uh specific methodologies do
you have? Because for example, in, at least in
some sciences, we can do experiments, but in this
case, is that possible? I mean, how do you
approach it?
Yeah, well, you know, we, we call, we call
studying history, um. Natural experiments, and so it's not
quite the same as science, you know, you can't
control all the factors. It is different, it is
harder because you, you know, you're, you're not in
control. You can't say, OK, I'm gonna hold these
three things steady and only um manipulate this one
thing. You just sort of get what you get.
But, I mean, and this is where clear dynamics
kind of comes in. If you are making your
assumptions very clear, if you are, um, and this
is the, the benefit of the scientific method. It
just puts everything on the table. You have to
spell it out using math, you know, It is
very useful. And just having that kind of language
of math helps to, um, you know, set the
stage and say, OK, well, here's, here's what I
think. Here's the connection between these variables. This is
a hypothesis. Then you could actually go in the
past and look for, OK, did that hold up?
Did it not? Where does that pattern hold? Where
are the deviations from it? And so, you know,
the more societies, the more cases, the more evidence
you can gather using traditional historical means. You can
then put them into um this framework and use
that as the sort of natural experiments to say,
OK, well, yes, it, you know, 85% of the
cases that holds this way, but in these other
15% it doesn't, and here's why, and you can
start to really unpack that. So again, you know,
it's it's not so much. It's not so much
the, the sources, the type of evidence that you
use, it's really just that approach to I have
a hypothesis, I'm gonna test it. It just happens
to be what you're using to test is um
knowledge about the about the past.
And so, how does it relate to perhaps some
more traditional approaches in history that are more based
or focused on what we could call narratives, that
is, this happened, that happened, that person did this,
the other person did that and this and that
event happened. So how does it relate to that?
It, yeah, it's a really good question. It, it's,
you know, as I say, it's more in line
and it seems at first. I think the, the
real You know, it's not replacing anything. Let me
put it that way. OK really what it's adding,
it's trying to add this extra layer. So it
says, OK, well, that's great, and let's keep doing
that, and that's really important to have that, as
you say, these narratives, these sort of stories about,
well, these are the key figures, these are the
actions they took, these are the reactions. And then
on top of that you're adding, OK, well, You
know, why, why did they do that? What were
the pressures that were placed on them? Did other
societies face similar pressures? And if so, did they
respond in similar ways? If not, why not? What
are the long term effects? And so it's really
kind of taking that step back and say, OK,
what's the bigger picture? What are the broad patterns,
the dynamics that we're seeing? And when you, you
know, when you're At that level, right? When you're
at the kind of macro level, when you're looking
at many, you know, dozens or even hundreds of
different cases at once, it's really hard to just
keep all that in your head. And this is
where that sort of scientific method, the clear dynamics
tools come into play as they help you organize
and keep control of all that different um uh
evidence and material in order to really pick apart
these are the patterns, these are the causal uh
drivers of of this and that. Mhm.
Does it help answer some traditional questions in the
history, like, for example, when people debate or have
the debate between big men or big ideas kind
of approaches to history or, for example, some more
materialist approaches versus ideological approaches, stuff like that. Does
it help answer those kinds of questions?
I, I would say so. I mean, I think
it's, it's not only does it help, it's kind
of the best way to approach those. You know,
one of the things we say in the oak
group all the time is, You know, if you
look at sort of the study of history, they
are really, really good at knowing a ton about
the societies that they explore. They're really, really good
about coming up with ideas, basically hypotheses for why
things happen. The traditional approaches are not so good
at um at getting rid of some of the
options, right? Really good at uh expanding and adding.
They're not so good at resolving. And this is
where the sort of scientific method included comes in.
You know, for example, I can't even remember somebody
counted once there were like 80+ um different hypotheses
put forward very reasonable by learned scholars about why
Rome collapsed. Eating, like, oh that's, that's a lot.
It can't be all of them, and they just
keep adding and adding and OK, well here's a
new take and what about this, and here's another
factor, and that's great. So the scientific method, what
it is good at is coming in and say,
OK, this is fantastic. These are all different hypotheses.
They make different assumptions. Let's go test them with
the data. Let's go explore the history and say,
OK, well, this one holds, this one is unlikely
to be the case because it doesn't actually follow.
And again, it just adds that Structure making things
more explicit to be able to start to reduce
the number of our hypotheses. You know, something like
the, the big man, big ideas, um, sort of
debate is a similar thing like it, it rages
for centuries, really. Um, YOU know, people go back
and forth and, you know, you can, you can
induce um evidence on all sides. Clear dynamics comes
in and says, OK, well, you know, what, what,
what would it look like if it was Big
men, so-called these, you know, major individuals with power,
with authority driving historical events, or if it's, you
know, people are being compelled by ideas and how
do they shape. Yeah, let's actually explore that. Let's
see which ones, you know, tend to lead to
these major changes that we can explore in different
societies. Yeah. You know, we, we've done a little
bit of that kind of work. We've looked at
sort of ideological developments. It turns out, of course,
as you might expect, it's a little bit of
both, right? You need all of it. It's, you
know, individuals responding to ideological changes which themselves are
responding to individual actions. So you can, you can
draw this complex web, you know, when we look
at, for example, um, our work on the axial
age, we show individuals matter, societies matter, ideas matter,
material constraints matter, what else is going on in
the world, environments matter. All these things matter. And
the only way you can really expose all of
That and, as I say, the only way you
can keep all of those different forces in your
mind at one time is by using this sort
of quantitative formulas. It really, really helps, um, being
able to put that together so that you can
even approach a question like, you know, is it,
is it big men or is it big ideas
that drive history?
Yeah, and I guess that without an approach such
as this and a more scientific approach to history,
I mean, people, traditional historians, and I'm not trying
to be disrespectful, but there is respectful here in
any way, but, uh, they can just come up
with more and more and more different factors that
they think might have played a role. Perhaps it
was that person, perhaps it was that person over
there. Perhaps it was some of the Societal, perhaps
it was a societal context because it was perhaps
it was an invasion by another country, something like
that to, to explain the fall of a particular
empire, for example. But without this kind of approach,
at the end of the day, it's, I guess
it would just be a matter of taste or
of being convinced by a certain explanation that, uh,
For, for people to really think that would be
the right answer, I guess.
Yeah, exactly. You know, and when, when I go
to conferences, when I go to workshops, of historians,
you do get these debates and you get these
arguments of, oh, you know, well, well, here's, here's
good evidence that it is, you know, this, this
charismatic leader. Here's good evidence that it is, you
know, this environmental change. And really, almost all the
time, they're both right, right? Like these are very
learned smart people. They know what they're talking about,
and they are reducing proper evidence, but it's only
telling one part of the story. And if you
only focus on that, as you say, you know,
you can, you can get convinced that this is
the answer, and then somebody else focuses on a
different part, and they're convinced that that's the answer.
You need a framework to be able to say,
OK, well, they actually fit together. Here's how they
influence each other. This is, you know, at one
level of analysis with the individuals, environmental forces at
a different level of analysis. So they actually are
completely um compatible explanations. But unless you have that
framework to um be able to See how these
different uh forces at different levels interact, you're never
gonna be able to unpack it. And again, you
know, it's not like Cleodynamics wants to come in
and and stop like all of that knowledge, all
the traditional um historical approaches are super necessary. JUST
wants to add a new extra layer to say,
OK, well, yeah, let's take all of this great
learning and let's put it into this kind of
hypothesis testing type of scientific um method in order
to sort of move beyond some of these these
arguments as you mentioned.
Mhm. So let me confront you with another big
question in history just before we move on to
smaller questions and more circumscribed questions here. So this
history repeat itself?
Uh, THAT'S a really good question. I mean, this
is. This is exactly the kind of thing that
my colleagues and I with Seat want to look
into and and start to ask these questions, and
you can only even ask this question when you
are looking at the grand sweep of history, when
you're looking at thousands of thousands of years and
hundreds of different societies. You know, where, where I
land on this, I would say, There's uh I
I'm misquoting Mark Twain here, but he said something
along the lines of, um, history doesn't repeat itself,
but it does rhyme. And I think that kind
of captures it. There's always, every society, there's always
unique circumstances, no two are exactly the same. No
two events are quite exactly the same. The context
shifts, the environment shifts, the interaction with your neighbors
is a little bit different, but, um, there are
definitely patterns, and I think that's what the rhyming
really gets at. There are things that occur again
and again. Humans are, you know, we've changed, we've
evolved, but there's a lot. Sort of at our,
at the heart of who we are as a
species that has remained constant for thousands of years.
How we take care of ourselves and our families,
how we organize in groups, how we sort of
engage in collective action, you know, maintain material, you
know, food and shelter, all of these different drives
are the same and our our solutions to problems
that arise are often the same, you know, confronting
with violence, um. But also cooperation, supporting each other,
mutual aid, all of these things you can see
happen again and again and again, responding to the
same kinds of circumstances that come up. So there
are, there are a lot of rhymes, but it
is important to understand. You know, A, what are
the sort of unique circumstances, and B, what I
think is really critical is, is getting at, you
know, these patterns don't just happen on their own,
right? It's not just some magical thing that that
makes us act in certain ways. There are reasons,
you know, those reasons keep occurring, which is why
these patterns happen again and again. But there are,
there are drivers, there are causal forces that lead
to these outcomes, and it's really important to understand
that so that we can repeat the ones we
want to repeat, and maybe move beyond the kind
of things we don't want, like war, like violence,
like all of the stereotyping that, you know, all
the bad things that we do to each other.
They are recurrent, they are patterns, but they don't
have to be, right? There are specific reasons why
we act that way, that we can um move
beyond and I think having that perspective is really,
really crucial in history really helps um reveal where
we, where we can be better, I would say.
And I imagine that these sort of patterns, we
should expect them or they were to be expected
because, I mean, if two different societies or more
than two different societies are exposed to the same
circumstances, if, for example, social, economic, political factors are
similar, if they are affected by, for example, natural
disasters, something like that, or if people react the
same way. To similar sorts of circumstances or their
leaders make similar sorts of decisions, then we would
expect, even though not exactly the same results, but
similar results,
right? Yeah, exactly, exactly. And we do see that,
uh, you know, the natural disasters is really good
because those have been happening forever, right, as long
as human societies that happen, dealing with floods, with
earthquakes, with droughts, and you can see, you know,
There's a fairly narrow range of reactions that societies
have, and it depends on, you know, um, their,
their circumstances are, are they wealthy? Is there material,
is their infrastructure built up? Is there trust in
sort of the state to respond? If so, you
tend to see one kind of reaction where you
see, you know, a redistribution of resources, you'll see
aid, you'll see rebuilding pretty quickly. In in societies
where the same kind of thing happens where, you
know, inequality has taken hold, where government kind of
dysfunctional, where there's a lot of sort of corruption.
The, the sort of response mechanisms aren't quite there.
You see those kind of disasters spiral into humanitarian
crises, leads to violence, leads to unrest, leads to
rebellions, it's, you know, over and over you can
spot dozens and dozens of different cases that follow
one of those kind of two broad types, and
it's pretty clear. You know, what are the conditions
that lead one or the other. Again, those are,
you know, in every different part of the world,
every different time period, we've seen um the same
sort of things materialize.
So something that you've been interested in, and this
is a more uh more specific question now, is
inequality, social and economic across history. So what do
we know about it through clear dynamics and what
are the effects it had on human histories through
human society, sorry, throughout history? Yeah,
yeah, yeah. Um, I mean, this is, this is
the big question. I, I would say we know
too much about it, unfortunately, um, you know, this
is. Again, this is one of these common patterns
that we see again and again of societies, you
know, even, even ones that for a time, are
experiencing growth and, um, you know, looking after the
well-being of the population. It'll tend to shift, uh,
you know, those structures get co-opted, um. Wealth and,
and sort of power holders can um divert resources
sort of to their own aims, aims, inequality then
takes root. Again, we see this time and time
again. I'm, I'm hard pressed to think of a
society that hasn't experienced this for at least some,
some portion of its of its life span. You
know, one of the things that I've been saying
lately, and, and this is really at the heart
of my recent research is trying to look at
inequality, why does it happen? What does it do
to societies, how do we get past it. You
know, I, I've been calling it um one of
history's great, uh, villains here, and it just, it's
so corrosive in so many ways, at so many
levels. You know, there's the sort of the obvious
as inequality holds, those at the sort of bottom
end of the spectrum are left without. They are,
you know, don't have the resources, they are often
um excluded from the halls of power, from political
decisions, their material circumstances are poor, right? Their well-being
declines. That's horrible. But that's kind of the obvious
one. Everyone knows that, that's clear. I think what's,
what's less clear what we've been able to reveal
by clear dynamics, again, by, you know, looking specifically
at all of these different societies. OK, what happens?
What happens to different groups? How do people react?
Why do these things take hold? What we find
is that, um, you know, inequality is just as
corrosive at the other end of the spectrum, right?
Even those at sort of the top, right, the
wealthy elite, the politically powerful. It seems like they're
doing well, and they, you know, try to maintain
these systems that divert a society's resources more and
more and more into their own hands themselves and
their family. This is how inequality grows, right? You're
accumulating wealth at sort of this, this top level,
the rich 1%, the 10%, whatever you wanna uh
market it as. But it's, it's, it's ephemeral, right?
It's fleeting. It, it looks like you're being taken
care of, but it actually breeds, um, hostility, it
breeds frustration, it breeds competition, you know, you can
sort of accumulate all this stuff, but you can
never get everything you want. You can never translate
all that wealth into political prominence, like, people are
gonna be left behind. You're gonna promise your children
that they're gonna be as well off as you
are. It doesn't always happen. This leads to frustration,
this leads to anger, this leads to resentment. And
when that starts to bubble up, you start to
see a lot of um maladaptive behavior. You see
partisan fighting, you see conflict, you see these sort
of fundamentalist attitudes start to take hold, you start
to do more and more extreme things, trying to
change or recapture what you think you're owed, um,
you know, You can look around the world today,
right? We're seeing this all over the place, like
a lot of the, um, you know, political infighting,
a lot of the um sort of different attitudes,
a lot of the sort of political dysfunction, democratic
backslidings people are calling it. You can trace to
these these long periods of inequality that have been
growing for decades, and, you know, people are are
upset because they are being left without. But people
are also being upset because they have accumulated too
much, and it's over, they're overproduced, right? There's, there's
too many people with too much wealth, too much
power, fighting with each other, not actually getting what
they want. It seems like they are, but they're
not. And that's a really volatile situation to be
in, and the society tends to be very fragile,
um, to that, you know, when, when equality takes
root and is allowed to fester for decades. It
leads to violence, it leads to unrest, it, it,
in many cases leads to complete societal collapse and
um I think, you know, unfortunately, this pattern is
repeating itself now, but as you say, The clear
dynamics approach, because you can track specifically, OK, here
is the well-being of, of different groups, you can
see how it changes over time, you can see
it happening in different societies, you know, we have
a theoretical framework and methods to um uncover when
and where and why inequality like this sets in.
And again, the, you know, the news isn't great.
Historically reveals, history reveals that more often than not,
the societies where this happens undergo some pretty catastrophic
violence, major civil war, uh, or, or, um, similar.
So, unfortunately, you know, I, it's it's always depressing
when I talk about this. So it's not great
news, but, you know, the more we can learn
about it, the more we understand the drivers. I
do think there's a, there's a chance that we
can, um. You know, start to respond and, and
deal with it, uh, in the present.
But I mean, do we have a good understanding
of which factors drive inequality? I mean, what gives
rise to inequality, basically.
Oh, a lot of things, um, you know, it,
it, it sort of It because it occurs so,
so frequently, a lot of times what we see
is there will be a shift, where society will
sort of, you know, come into being, it's putting
in particular structures to grow, it's growing its wealth,
it's building things, it's growing its infrastructure, it's maybe
expanding its territory, it's growing its people, its population
grows. And, you know, there's often um some inequalities,
but they're usually kept fairly low. Most societies, when
they are functioning well, have mechanisms to keep that
inequality kind of at bay. There's, you know, taxes,
there's spending, there's welfare programs, even in ancient societies,
there were programs and infrastructure that were looking to
distribute the resources broadly to all of the people.
So everyone was benefiting a little bit as, as
a society. Excuse me, as the society is going
along. What happens is usually there ends up being
a mismatch in that structure. So one part of
it will kind of still grow while the other
parts stop, and that kind of breeds these um
Opportunities for diverting the resources more and more to
those with power, to those with wealth. And it
starts really slowly. I mean, this is why it
creeps in, right? It's not like it just happens
overnight that everyone can see it and somebody passes
a law that says, OK, all of a sudden,
you know, all of the tax revenue of the
society is going to go to me and my
friends. Like, it's not that dramatic. And this is,
I think, why it allow it, it's able to
um take root. It's, it's hard to see on
the ground when you're living in it. You know,
but there will be people or families with particular
um You know, have, have a little bit more
authority, have a little bit more wealth than others,
and instead of, of, you know, all of a
sudden. Not all of a sudden, but over time,
the structures that were were sort of keeping that
at bay, start to get loosened a little bit,
right? You say, OK, well, you know, everything is
going well. There's, there's sort of population growth, the
economy is growing, there's a lot of people, labor's
getting a little bit cheap. I can take a
little bit more, right? I'm, I'm a, a business
owner. I'm, I'm interested in sort of buying this
labor. It's getting a little bit cheap, my profits
are growing. I'm gonna use those profits to buy
a little bit more land. I'm gonna use those
profits to secure my position for myself and my
children a little bit further. And then they have
an extra Their wealth has been grown in that
generation, then they do the same thing. So in
the next generation, it grows a little more. And
it takes a little bit of time, but over
generations, it can become really um obscene, the, the
amount of wealth and the amount of inequality, right?
So it's, it's that kind of of action, right?
It's, it's decisions by individuals, especially those with wealth
and power, to give themselves a little bit more
wealth and power. And when you do that a
bunch of different times, you end up with Fairly
drastic inequality. And, you know, you start to, people
with wealth who are also, um, you know, hold
positions of political authority, they're kind of in charge
of the rules. And if the rules are um
curtailing their ability to, to, uh, divert resources to
themselves, they can change those rules. They can, you
know, lower the tax rates. They can make sure
that, you know, instead of the state spending its
money on Schools and hospitals, um, you know, they're
spending it on, um, You know, uh, uh, buying
the goods that me and my wealthy people produce,
right? Whether it's, you know, agricultural goods and oil,
or fancy ceramics or tiles or whatever it happens
to be. And again, this is even ancient scieties
go through this. And slowly you pick away, you
sort of turn on that wealth pump, as my
friend, uh, Peter Thurn calls it. And then all
of a sudden now the resources that had been
redirected back to the majority population. ARE being redirected
to just that sort of uh wealthy 1% elite,
and that's, that's really how it takes hold. And
it takes many different forms, but it's always that
kind of process.
But I mean, for a society to reach such
high levels of inequality that it starts crumbling or
the societal structure, the societal cohesion starts crumbling. I
mean, it has to be done uh intentionally, right?
I mean, it's people, the economic elites, uh, together
with politicians making those decisions. It's not something that
just occurs. I'm, I'm not sure if this is
the best word to use, but to use it,
to use here, but it's not something that occurs
naturally, right? Because I'm asking you that because sometimes
we hear suggestions from certain people, certain pundits, for
example, that if, uh, inequality. It rises, it's just
the system, it's just how the system works. It's
inevitable, something like that. But I mean, at least
according to what you just, you just said there,
it seems to me that, that it's not inevitable.
Yeah, that's a really good question. Um, YOU know,
I, I would say again, this is, this is
why clear dynamics is helpful. Because it helps uh
but it's true, it gives us that frame to
um really explore a question like that. So what
we find, and if you look at, for example,
evolutionary work, if you even look at other species,
what we find is that there's a bit of
a contradiction in the way that humans work. OK.
So there is You know, yeah, natural, is maybe
not the right word. There's not really a good
word for it. It is very common and there
are reasons why humans and many, most other species,
um, are OK with hierarchies, right? Hierarchies are very
dangerous, but they're also can be very helpful, right?
Like there's a coordination challenge, having somebody in charge,
even just to set the. Agenda, right? If you
ever been in like a meeting with more than
3 people, you know, it can be pretty chaotic,
unless there's kind of somebody in charge, somebody like
you who's actually leading the interview, asking the questions,
right? There is a reason why these sorts of
hierarchies emerge in humans and other groups, right? So
we're very comfortable with that. It is very helpful
in a lot of circumstances, especially as societies become
bigger in scale. It's just so hard. To coordinate
to keep track, to manage hundreds if not millions
of different people, without some kinds of positions of
authority, um, in, in some way. So there is
that, that is, you know, natural, if, if that's
the word you want to use, and, and many
people do as, as you point out. So there
is something there, right? There is something useful in
that. There's a reason that that emerges again and
again and again in different contexts throughout history and,
and even in other species. On the other hand,
humans are naturally evolved to be pretty averse and
um Sort of disgusted by gross inequities. So those
kind of two things don't seem like they go
together, but they sort of do, right? Like, even
if you, if you run psychological experiments, you can
sort of tell people, you know, in the abstract,
you know, is it, is it fair if, you
know, person X has 100 times more wealth than
person Y, pretty much everybody will say, yes, that's
not fair, that shouldn't happen, some rules should come
in, even those with extreme wealth would say that's
not right, some rules should happen. So we are,
you know, inclined to not accept those kinds of
extreme inequalities, especially when it becomes embedded in the
person, rather than the position. Right? So there's hierarchies
in terms of having uh a person like a
president, a prime minister, whatever. But one of the
reasons we have sort of term limits and these
kinds of rules is to get around this contradiction.
We want there to be somebody in charge, but
we don't want often a person to have too
much power. So we, we try to have these
institutions that kind of balance those two things. And
with wealth, again, this happens that. In many cases,
when things are going well, you will have hierarchies
emerge, you'll have people who are, you know, in
in charge of political stuff or military or economic.
They gain these sort of extra uh amounts of
power. Because of their position, and it works for
a time. But when they, when they sort of
hold on to that, when they use that power
to give themselves a little bit more to solidify
that, to pass it on to their children, so
that it's not just the office itself that holds
power, it's, it's me and my family. That becomes
a little bit of a different situation. That's how
it can then grow generation after generation and become
sort of this entrenched, uh, uh, inequity that just
builds and grows and becomes farther. You know, so
it is the result of decisions, but it's not
always. It's not always just purely selfish and and
with ill intent, you know, people honestly think, OK,
well, you know, I'm, I'm performing a service, I'm
the governor, I'm, you know, the CEO, whatever. I
deserve a little bit more. I'm doing something important.
My action, you know, provides this benefit to the
society. And so, you know, I want to look
after my kids. And I mean, I'm not thinking
about the impact on the wider society. If I
was, maybe I wouldn't do the same thing. But
if you're nearly focused on, OK, well, I want
to take care of myself and my family, so
I'm gonna act in this way. And it seems
small, and there's no immediate effect from it. But
then in the next generation, your kid does the
same thing, and then their kid does the same
thing, and then 100 other kids do the same
thing. And before you know it, it's gone out
of control. So it's not, it's not quite always
as intentional, you know, I don't think that the
individuals are necessarily always the villains in the story.
It is the system, right? It's, it's the system
that uh You know, you need institutions, you need
rules, you need regulations that prevent that kind of
action, because if you don't have them, if those
institutions are weakened, then very small. Seemingly with good
intent kind of actions can lead to these terrible
consequences down the road. I think that's where we
are. And again, this is why, one of the
reasons why the historical um Approach is so important
is, you know, you can, you can look at
sort of the state of inequality today in any
kind of snapshot. But you're never gonna understand why
it happened, unless you look 25, 30, 50 years
before, cause it takes a lot of time for
it to get to where it is today, right?
So you really need that, that long-term dynamic kind
of understanding, because it is, it's not just one
big decision by a selfish jerk. It's a bunch
of little decisions by pretty well-meaning um individuals that,
that lead to these bad situations. I don't know
if that, if that makes sense, but there is
that kind of contradiction of You know, we, we
do want and and accept some kinds of hierarchy,
but we also don't want too much inequality, and
it's really hard to maintain a balance there. It's
sort of a constant uh vigilance is needed.
So earlier when I asked you the first question
about inequality, you mentioned phenomenon like elite overproduction and
infighting, but is it that in more unequal societies,
we also see more competition not only among people
who are already part of the elites and then,
and want to accumulate even more wealth and power
and so on. But also across the other socioeconomic
stra, I mean, is there also more competition for
people to try to reach those higher spots because
they are the most secure in their societies.
Yeah, uh, that's extremely well put. I mean, I
think that's exactly right. And this is again, what
we see time and time again, um, when we
explore these situations, and this is what I mean
that. Inequality is corrosive throughout. You know, it is,
as this wealth accumulates, generally what we find, and
this is, this is common again throughout, um, you
know, different contexts. But as people amass wealth and
authority, they always wanna almost always wanna translate that
into other aspects. So, you know, if you get
rich, you want to also be a politician or
you also, whatever, whatever the society values. You want
to have this sort of prestigious uh authority in
this other position. Generally, those are kind of limited,
those are fixed, right? Like, you look at the
US, there's 100 senators, there's always been 100 senators,
that's it. So no matter how many rich people
think they deserve a Senate seat, there's only ever
going to be 100 at a time. And so,
the more rich people come in, the more wealth
of masses, the more people think they have a
shot or deserve one of those positions, the more
there's going to be frustration, because uh, you know,
people are gonna be left out. But as you
say, As that is happening, people, you know, just
below that are seeing this, oh, well, you know,
if I just had a little bit more wealth,
I could be like them. I could join that
class. Oh, they look like they're having a lot
of fun. They look like they're doing great, you
know, yeah, I'm pretty well off, but I'm not
super rich like my neighbor. I went to this
party with that guy. I want to be like
him. So you then strive to get that extra
wealth, but a bunch of other people are doing
that too. So again, that competition goes in. And
as you say at the same time, as this
inequality is um uh getting deeper, it also means
that there's more and more people sort of in,
in the bottom 80%, let's say, of the socioeconomic
um strata, who are suffering, right, legitimately. Their well-being
is declining, they don't have material resources, they don't
feel like they're being included in the political process
because they're not, um, and they're frustrated, they're angry.
And that breeds competition as well, both with, you
know, anger at, at the wealthy elites who are
in these halls of power. You say, well, how
come you have everything, I want you to change
the system, I want to bring you down, I
want to, you know, change things up. But also,
as you say, with each other, we do find
that factions tend to form, you do see this
sort of partisanship, even among the non-elite um classes.
Again, a lot of it is, well, you know,
maybe it's, you're different than me, maybe you're the
reason why I'm suffering, you know, there's a reason
that sort of Xenophobic nationalist kind of attitudes. Again,
these are not modern phenomena. You see these across
history, when things aren't going well, when inequality takes
hold, people start to lash out. They want to
look for a scapegoat, they wanna see, OK, who,
who is keeping me down, who is an other,
who's who's a different group, who's different than me,
that I can maybe blame for, for what's going
on or or focus my anger on. So you
see those kind of splits, you see those factions
forming, you want to, you know, you want to
be upwardly social socially mobile, but maybe you're being
prevented because the system, the structure has now developed,
inequality has developed to a way that, that you're
not there. And when you combine both of those,
when there's factions and unrest among the non-elites, and
there's overproduction and competition among the elites, They tend
to join up, and that's when you really see
violence spike. Like most major civil wars follow that
path, right? It, it's a very, as I say,
it's a very dangerous, very volatile situation. I should
say, You know, there is a line of thought
that says, well, that's actually necessary, that the only
way you can, you know, once you get in
the situation where the system isn't working, where you
have this inequality, you need something to break it.
There is some historical evidence for that. It's a
little choppy, but there are, you know, some suggestions
that, OK, you need some dramatic events to change
the system, like a civil war. I, I am
always of the opinion that, you know, we can
have the change without the violence. Like civil wars
are awful. Um, THEY are horrible, all wars are
horrible, they're violent, that's what we want to avoid,
and we also want to improve people's lives. We
should be able to do the one without having
to have the other, um, and, you know, It's,
it's, uh, It's also the case that not every
civil war or or major dramatic, you know, violent
uh revolution or rebellion, it doesn't always lead to
improvement in people's well-being in the next phase, like,
oftentimes it leads to authoritarian crackdowns. And so there's
no guarantee. Um, SO, you know, it's a little
bit of a be careful what you wish for.
Like, it's, it's, there are, like, I, I get
the mindset that sort of says, well, maybe this
is something we need, maybe this is something we
should be pushing for. You know, it's historically, we
find that it's not, it's not as straightforward as
it may seem sometimes. I guess that's where I'm
trying to get to. That was a long answer
to your question, but it's a really important topic,
I think, and so, yeah, yeah.
But when we reach a point in a particular
society where a revolution is about to occur, I
mean, what leads to a revolution is people at
the bottom because by then we have uh a
huge number of people who are, who have been
basically abandoned by the system and are incredibly frustrated.
Is it them mobilizing among themselves, or is it,
for example, some people who are part of the
elites mobilizing them for revolution?
Yeah, it's a really good question. That's actually part
of a research project that I have right now
ongoing with a colleague, Rachel Ainsworth. We're trying to
look into revolution specifically, why do they happen and
especially what happens afterwards, like what are the conditions
that a revolution will lead to improvements in people's
lives and when doesn't. And it's really interesting. So,
you know, you definitely have movements of, you know,
that kind of grassroots um style movement where you
have a groundswell of popular unrest, um. Rarely, almost
never, is that sufficient for a major system change
revolution. You can have violence, you can have sort
of protests, you can have unrest because of that
sort of popular groundswell, maybe sometimes you can get
institutional reforms because of it. Um, I'm actually working
on a piece right now that looks at different
cases, for example, um, you know, we, we've been
looking at, uh, the mid-nineteenth century England. Again, popular
groundswell of, of unrest, there was violence, there was
protests, there was major strikes at factories. This is
early industrial England. And what happened was, you know,
the elite, the political class were fairly cohesive. So
it didn't, it didn't lead to a civil war.
It didn't spiral, but there was kind of enough
politicians, enough elite who said, well, you know, this
isn't going well, this isn't gonna end well for
us. We should probably take some of these demands
seriously, and it led to actually this period of
good reforms, like, Um, safety protections for workers in
factories and wage protections, and, you know, a lot
of good kind of welfare policies came from it.
We wouldn't call that a revolution, right? That's, that's
a mini rebellion, that sort of protest that led
to this period of reform. When you're talking about
like a major armed revolution. You know, That's, that's
so big that we historians can actually sort of
identify it as a revolution. In almost every case,
you get that that groundswell of unrest and people
sort of taking up arms to make change. But
it has to link up with frustrated elites as
well. Like without, if, if the people in power
hold together, if they are completely united, a revolution
doesn't have a chance in pretty much any situation.
You need at least some factions of those with
with wealth and power to get on board for
it to turn into a real major revolutionary moment
in in pretty much every case, I would say,
um. And again, for good and bad, sometimes that
leads to, you know, um, Positive system change, sometimes
it's just a bunch of violence and things are
kind of worse afterwards. You, you get a little
bit above. But in almost every sort of major
revolutionary case, it is a combination of Non-elites getting
frustrated and elites um also being uh sort of
feeling left out by the current status quo and
wanting, wanting to upend things, wanting things to change.
But is that because uh the elites, if they
all get together, they have power over or they
can control the military and so they are more
powerful than the rest of the population. BECAUSE I
was wondering because one could think that, oh, but
the people at the bottom are so, so many
that they can overthrow the elites anyway. But I,
I mean, why is it that they need, that
they need some support from at least a faction
of the elites?
Yeah, uh, it, it, it is that sort of
suppressive mechanism. Like if, if those who are in
most control of the wealth, the political authority, the
military authority, the use of violence, if they are
united and are willing to sort of use their
authority to suppress dissent, they can suppress dissent in
almost every case. Try to think of of examples
where, where, um, you know, I mean, you, you
can see that all the time. It's short-lived, I
will say like, you can't, you can't have a
society that does that for hundreds of years and
it functions super well. Eventually, it will crack, right?
Eventually, um, You know, you're devoting so much time
and effort to dissent. That either, you know, an
elite group will splinter off and then you're not
united anymore, or what happens most of the time,
those are weakened societies that are taken over by
somebody else. Um, RIGHT, not, it's not a viable
long-term strategy, but it can suppress, uh, dissent, it
can suppress a potential revolution in, in the short
term. You know, you think of like Jack Goldstone,
um, writes a lot about This and about, you
know, the way that any sort of major revolution
needs to have some power holders in charge, you
can find suppression. Yeah, all over the place and,
and, you know. If, if, if, if the powers
that you want to, they generally can, but only
for a time. And so, you know, this, this
is what I mean is that, you know, that's
not necessarily the, the right path. If you want
things to change, you know, it's, it's History suggests
that you, you want to get people on board,
you want to build coalitions, you want to do
some of that, um, You know, it can't just
be popular uprising. OK, we're, you know, we're gonna
come with pitchforks and, and take your stuff, that
tends not to work out so well for anybody,
um. A caution to the uh to the organizers
out there, I guess. Yeah.
So uh what do we have good examples of
societies who across history have been able to, so
to speak, right the ship before it got to
a point where they could no longer do it
where extreme inequality was so high that the revolution
or some sort of uprising was not preventable.
Yeah, um, it's a really good question and, and
one of the things I'm trying to focus on
right now, it's harder to find than you would
like it to be. There's only a sort of
smattering of different examples, um. You know, it is,
it is difficult to sort of assess and discover,
you know, a revolution that didn't happen that is
really tricky. You know, I think of You know,
for example, you know, I was just talking about
um the 19th century in England. You can look
at, you know, English history in sort of the,
the large sweep of things. You look at sort
of the 17th century, you look at You know,
inequality was on the rise. There was a lot
of unrest. There was, you know, pretty extreme um
suffering by large segments of the population. This is
sort of late medieval, um, early modern, um, period.
You know, it's, it's sort of post feudal, uh,
kind of situation. There's, there's a lot of extreme
restrictions on many people, you know, in terms of
their wealth, in terms of their movement, in terms
of their access. There was a, a groundswell of,
of unrest. But that had been suppressed for hundreds
of hundreds of years, right? Like, it was unequal,
you know, sort of medieval feudal period. Europe was
highly unequal. And it's not like everyone was rioting
in the streets every year. This is sort of
part of the example of what I mean. When,
when sort of the elites, when the power holders
were united, they could, they could keep that at
bay fairly well. You know, 17th century in England,
this starts to creep into this inequality, this different
factioning that's forming, you know, fights between different religious
branches, fights between sort of the, the landed economic
elite and some of the other sort of elites
who are growing up and and getting wealth from
trade and other sources. It's starting to create these
frictions. Um, YOU can see, you know, For a
lot of reasons we don't need to get into,
but it, it spirals into one of these major
periods and it turns into civil war, right? It's,
it's a serious thing. All of these different conditions
are there, inequality, unrest, lead overproduction, different sources of,
of wealth and power coming to a head, leading
to this friction. So that that happens, and that's
the most common thing. Again, what happens, you know,
you look at the same, the same country a
few 100 years later. Inequality is again taken root
for the same kind of reasons, you know, it
was reset a little bit after the Civil War,
but then over time, over generations, it grew back
up. Unrest is there, industrial, uh, industrialization is coming
to the country. So people are getting really, really,
really rich from this industrial movement, but also many
people are suffering, right? There's just no protection, there's
no wage protections, there's no safety regulations in early
factories in early industrial Europe. You know, it's, it's
a horrible conditions. People are really suffering. There's a
lot of people who are moving to the cities
cause they just can't find enough land and work
in the, in the uh farmlands. Mhm. So they
moved to the cities and all they can find
are these really horrible jobs in these factories. The
conditions are terrible, they're way, way overworked. They're dying,
they're, you know, Disease is rampant. It's awful. So
there's a lot of unrest. There's violence, there's things
that are happening. And in many cases, the elite
would come in and say, well, you know, too
bad. I'm gonna suppress this, I'm gonna kind of
keep this at at bay. And for a while,
they did that, right? There were, there were strikes,
there were riots in factories where workers, you know,
walked out on masse, and the military was called
in and said, OK, you know, we're putting a
stop to this. We are suppressing this. So that
definitely happened. But what it takes, and there's, there's
a handful of other cases where this happens. This
happens in um early 20th century US as well,
basically the same exact process with this early industrial
situation. You know, what happens is you, you, you
see the suffering, you see how much Money, how
much time, how much resources, how much effort are
being spent just suppressing this dissent. There was enough
people in Parliament in England at the time, in,
in the mid-nineteenth century, you know, it's not, not
necessarily that their, their motives were entirely pure and,
and prosocial. They were maybe saying, oh, you know,
the only way I'm gonna hold on to my,
my, um, wealth and, and authority is we need
to take some of these things seriously. We, we
need to say, OK, these people are upset. They
have specific um um uh demands. Maybe it would
be better and cheaper for us as a state
to actually meet some of them. So there was
a switch, right? So, at first, you're standing in
the military to suppress riots at these factories. Then
enough politicians are saying, well, you know, we should
take this seriously. There were, you know, the, the
labor groups were in, in um conversation with some
of these elites, and they said, well, you know,
we are suffering, you should do something about it.
You should make our lives better, and we wouldn't,
we wouldn't protest so much. And you start to
pass all these different laws. You start to pass
safety regulations at factories, you start to give um
non-property owners the vote for the first time in
the mid-nineteenth century. So there was this sort of
political reform, you know, there was wage protections, there
was all this spending on, um, you know, what
they called at the time porthouses, which was this
attempt to Uh, provide food and shelter for those,
uh, who are, who are suffering. It didn't really
work that well. Like it wasn't a, a super
great system, but at least it was a start,
it was an attempt. It was something to build
on. And it, it worked, right? Disent leveled off
and without, you know, without a ton of violence,
you actually improved people's lives significantly. Um. You know,
again, it was partial, it didn't go as far
as it should have, but it was at least
a start. It was a nonviolent way to actually
improve people's well-being. And I think though there are
enough examples that look like that, that we can
sort of point to and see. It requires, you
know, just as a major revolution requires unrest among
the elite power holders. Successful nonviolent reform. Often, pretty
much, almost always, um requires some buy-in from the
elite power holders to say, yes, this is better
for all of us, even if I'm giving up
some of my wealth and privilege, it's better for
everybody, including myself. To have a system, a society
that works, that is stable, that can last in
the long term. It's really changing that sort of
short term thinking of, I need to hold on
to what I have right now for longer term
thinking, saying, well, if I give up a little
bit now, everyone will be better off in the
long term. I. That's really at the heart of
the successful, um, reform kind of movements. Really hard
to convince people in the moment to do that,
that have that kind of long perspective. But I
really think that's a lot of where these conversations
today, where we're seeing, uh, again, the same kind
of patterns sprout up. This is where we, we
want to be, um, going and what we want
to sort of hold on to.
OK, uh, I was actually going to ask you
exactly about that. So, do we see the same
kinds of dynamics and patterns playing out in our
contemporary societies when it comes to inequality, social unrest,
elite overproduction, and phenomena like that.
Yeah, absolutely. I mean, this is something, so, you
know, uh, our new organization Soda for Societal dynamics,
really, this is why it exists. It's sort of
an offshoot of our work with Sasha. You know,
it's such that we're trying to understand these patterns
and understand history. Soda is kind of uh uh
giving us that platform to say, OK, well, Let's
take what we've learned. Let's take what we know
about these historical processes and apply them to lessons
for the present day. How can we use this
to maybe help, um, you know, improve people's lives
today. And one of the reasons that we, we
started this organization is, is this realization that we
are repeating, you know, we are, we are, um,
filling out the same rhyme from the past. And,
you know, one of the questions we had, Peter
Kurchen and I, when we started a few years
ago looking into crises, where we're like, OK, well,
we assume that modern crises, you know, from, let's
say the 20th century on. ARE gonna look pretty
different from, you know, pre-industrial crises. That was sort
of our assumption. So we started to look into
it, we were exploring more contemporary societies. And more
and more we found, oh wait a minute, this
actually looks kind of the same, even though we
have all this new technology, the economy is totally
different, the way we produce things, fossil fuels, industrialization,
the internet, now AI we have all these amazing
technologies, right? There's a lot of things that are
totally new. But as I say, humans are still
humans, and we are still doing many of the
same things and falling into many of the same
patterns that we saw before. It was actually even
surprising to us about how many similarities there are,
you know, again. The same things that I've been
talking about, you see people. Being able to, you
know, in many countries, especially in sort of the
western or global North world, you know, late 1970s,
early 1980s, there was this period where You know,
the prevailing kind of economic and political wisdom was,
you know, oh, there's too many regulations, there's too
much rules, we need to grow the economy at
any cost. And this sort of allowed and promoted
individuals with wealth and power to, to kind of
set the rules. And again, as as we were
talking about a few minutes ago, what happens, it's
what always happens. You get some wealth, you get
some authority, you say, OK, well, now, well, let's
change the, you know, um tax code a little
bit more. Let's let's ease up on some of
these banking regulations so that we could grow the
economy, and it worked. The economies have been growing.
But it's also a small number of people have
been capturing more and more of that wealth, right?
The economy, economic growth is going into very few
people's hands, and it's, it's over time, right? It's,
it's multiple generations, tweaking uh tax rule, tweaking a
banking rule, you know, tweaking the way that the
economy works, buying real estate, how insurance, like, a
little bit at a time, generation after generation. Now,
we are finding ourselves in the situation where inequality
is at levels it hasn't been in hundreds of
years. In many, in many countries. So it's, it's
exactly the same kind of pattern. It's surprising at
how similar it is, even though so much of
our world is so different. Those kind of core
human traits, or human behaviors and responses are really
the same. And what this means is, we are
now facing the same things that people have faced
in the past, where we have this unrest, where
we have this elite overproduction and fighting, we have
this partisanship, we have this scapegoating and this sort
of uh retreat to fundamentalist, nationalist kinds of ideas.
And we are seeing the violence that often happens
from these situations start to arise today too, right?
It is not surprising, um, given the situation that
we are seeing what we're seeing today, but it
also means that we can, you know, the good
news is that it means that we can borrow
and adapt some of these things from the past
that worked. To ease tensions, those still should be
uh applicable and useful today. These kinds of reforms,
improving people's livelihoods, you know, there are ways to
do this. Um, YOU know, we just need the,
the sort of political and social will to, to
put it into practice, but yeah, um, you know,
the, the patterns are still there. It's, it's really,
it's eerie how how similar these are.
Mhm.
But
what do you mean exactly when you say that
we are living in an age of poly crisis?
What, what are poly crises?
So that I mean, this is, this is really.
It's a framework to help us understand exactly what's
happening today. And this is, you know, one of
the things that is different, not entirely, there are,
there are situations in the past that are similar
to this, but, um, never before have we seen
on such a, on such a global, truly global
scale. So many different societies all at once experiencing
the same kind of thing, right? The, the coordination,
the synchrony. Between these, these patterns, that's kind of
new, that's pretty scary. Again, there's a reason it's
because, you know, the, the economy is global. There's,
there's the same sorts of things are now affecting
the same societies at the same time, in a
way that hadn't happened before, right? COVID is a
global disease because we're all interconnected. And this is
really what the polycrisis idea is trying to capture.
It's that The state of our systems, our economic
system, our communications technology, travel, um, you know, our
political system, we are so entangled with each other,
right? Everything you can imagine, every kind of system,
every country is really intimately connected and interacts with
others. And what this means is that if one
system goes into dysfunction, say there's, you know, a
recession in one country, a major recession in one
country. It's going to affect the economy of other
countries, right? We're all interconnected. And if the economy
of all these countries is affected, it's also going
to affect the politics of many countries. It's gonna
affect food production. It's gonna affect the environment. Everything
is interconnected, right? So one thing drives another thing,
which drives another thing, which impacts the first thing.
It's this really complex mechanism, this feedback. My, I
have friends at the Cascade Institute who've done a
really good job of trying to articulate this, and
this is, you know, they use this term polycrisis
to describe the state of the world where all
of our systems are interconnected, and almost all of
them are under crisis right now. And again, it's
these long-term stressors that build up the way that
inequality builds up over decades, the way that our
environment has been suffering for decades because of our,
our production and consumption habits. These are long-term stresses
that have built up that have put all these
different systems at risk. And then you have these
triggering events, right? These fast moving trigger events that
hit those structures. A flash flood, a hurricane, you
know, uh, uh, a blip in the economy, you
know, a recession, but because the stress is so
high, when these things happen, It tends to permeate
and lead to enormous damage. Whereas if those same,
you know, trigger events had happened, uh, when everything
was healthy, they would have just been a little
blip that, you know, it would have caused some
damage, but we would have been able to recover
quickly. But because we're under such high stress and
all of these things are so connected, one thing
goes wrong in one place, it tends to, to
permeate throughout the globe and lead to a ton
of dysfunction. And that keeps us um at risk,
that keeps us kind of vulnerable for the next
thing to happen. And this is really what the
poly crisis is, this is what we're facing. We
have, there have been poly crises in the past,
at least. At least periods that are similar to
the pot crisis, so there is still a role
for history to play here. Um, BUT it is,
you know, there are still some unique aspects as
well, just how global, how truly, um, large scale
this interconnection is, that's happening today, which means it
just, it, it, it puts an even greater premium
on us to deal with some of these long-term
stresses like this deep rooted inequality that has taken
hold in so many different countries, like it is.
That is really one of the core things that
is, is putting us so at risk, and therefore,
that's one of the things that can help get
us out of it. Even the environmental degradation we're,
we're, um, seeing, a lot of that is fueled
by inequality, right? But this over uh amassing of
wealth and consumption. So, you know, as I always
say, like dealing with inequality is a climate solution,
right? These are not inter, these are not um
completely separate uh problems or phenomenon. I think this
is, this is what the crisis is really trying
to expose, um, how, how that all works together.
OK, so one last question then you've already alluded
to this before, but uh when it comes to
these public crises and perhaps focusing more on inequality
itself, because that's what we've been talking about the
most here today. I, I mean, Does Clio dynamics
have anything to tell us or do we have
anything to learn from it about what we should
do to tackle this issue? I mean, do you
have any suggestions, any lessons about it that that
we could apply today?
Yeah, I mean, this is, it's such a, it's
such a big important question and something I think
a lot about, you know, it's not, it's not
as clear cut as, OK, well, you know, history
says we need to do A, B, and C,
so we just do them. And, you know, it's,
it's a sort of one size fits all roadmap.
On the other hand, I do think that clear
dynamics does have a lot to say. It does,
it, it can help. Really what it helps is,
first of all, just exposing the depth of the
problem. And again, you know, as we talked about,
a lot of people know that inequality is a
big problem today. I don't think that many people,
even, you know, I, I've talked to some politicians
and some policymakers, and it comes as a surprise
to them just how deep the roots of the
problem are, that it goes back decades and generations,
that it is so structural, that, you know, it's,
it's not just We want to assume that it's,
you know, 11 policy, one rule that we can
undo that led to it. When you start to
expose that it's, you know, dozens of different actions
and different things over, you know, 20 to 30
years. It just shows you that it's a, the,
the problem is a bigger scope than you think.
And history can help us expose just how deep
these roots are, and that leads to different kinds
of solutions and different kinds of actions that need
to be taken. So you're not just, you know,
dealing with the surface problem, you're really getting at
the roots, you're really getting at the, the true
causes of the problem. And I think clear dynamics
is really helpful in exposing that. The other thing
is that, you know, as, as we have talked
about, there are periods where inequality has grown high.
There are even periods where, you know, environmental and
ecological distress, like we're experiencing today, has been very
prominent. Some societies dealt with it really poorly and
collapsed. Some societies dealt with it a little bit
better and we're able to maintain some resilience. We
can learn lessons from that. We can, we can
see what people have done in the past when
facing the same kind of problems we're facing today,
both for good and bad. And this gives us
options, right? Again, it's not, it's not a one
for one roadmap, right? It's not like, you know,
it's not historians should be, you know, the rulers
of us all. We have some ideas. We can
give you options. We can tell you what has
worked, what hasn't worked in in context, we can
tell you what is similar, what isn't similar today.
And this should form part of the conversation, not
the whole of it. But I think these ideas,
this understanding needs to be part of the discussions
that advocates, that um NGOs, that government officials, that,
you know, UN officials, policymakers are having. ABOUT what
to do when we see inequality, what has worked
in the past? What has the context been? Can
we apply some of these lessons today? And I
think there are a lot that we can, we
have to, we have to reshape some of the
things for our, our modern circumstances. But I think
it would be a mistake to overlook and ignore
what history has to teach us, because, you know,
we are, we are, we are and always have
been humans responding to these kinds of pressures. And
the way that we have done that successfully and
unsuccessfully in the past, can really help narrow our
possibility space for, for where we're trying to go
uh today and in the future. So I, I
do think there is a major role for clear
dynamics in this kind of approach. And this is,
this is what we're, we're trying to be part
of these conversations um right now.
Great. So if people are interested, where can they
find you and your work on the internet?
Yeah, uh, so I would go to Seat Databank.info,
um, for historical work and go to um Soda.
uh Soda.org, excuse me, which is SO dash DY.org,
um, for a more kind of policy future oriented
um type work. And, and please feel free to
reach out to me, send me an email, um,
and we can, we can talk about how this
all works even further.
Great. So, Doctor Hoyer, thank you so much again
for this great talk. It's always a pleasure talking
to you, as I said at the beginning, and
this has been great. So it's
been thank you Ricardo. uh, IT'S really great to
be able to, to share these thoughts and sort
of get this out there. So thank you for
having me back.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on. Patreon or
PayPal, I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Pergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Fredrik Sundo, Bernard Seyche Olaf,
Alexand Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis, Erika
Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly, then the Matter
Robert Windeguru Inai Zu Mark Neevs Colin Holbrookfield governor.
Mel Stormir Samuel Andre, Francis Fortiagnserus and Hal Herzagn
Macha and lays and Samuel Currie Heinz, Mark Smith,
Jo, Tom Hummel Sardus France David Sloan Wilsonasilla dearaurumen
ro Diego Correa Yannick Puntersmani Charlotte blini Barba Adamhn
Pavlostaevskynale back medicine Gary Galman Sam of saladrianeioltonin John
Barbosa Julian Price Edward Hall Edin Bronner. Douglas Fry,
Franca Bortolotti, Gabriel Ponscorte or Slelisky, Scott Zachary Fish
Tim Duffy, Sonny Smith, John Wieman, Daniel Friedman, William
Buckner, Paul Giorgarneau, Luke Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson,
Peter Wozin, David Williams, Diocosta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray,
Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez, Corale Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry
D. Lee Junior, old Erringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then
Sperber, Robert Grayigoren, Jeff McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix,
Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner, Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly
Johnson, Benjamin Gilbert, Jessica Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson,
Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis, Valentin Steinman, Perkrolis, Kate van
Goller, Alexander Hubbert, Liam Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi,
Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff
Sean Nelson, Mike Levine, and Jos Net. A special
thanks to my producers. These are Webb, Jim, Frank
Lucas Steffinik, Tom Venneden, Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benedic Muller,
Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal
Ni Cortiz and Nick Golden, and to my executive
producers Matthew Levender, Sergio Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie.
Thank you for all.